
<!--- Annotated Biliography -->

### Annotated Bibliography

I wanted to create a space where I can reflect on papers.  While I am pretty early stage in this academia thing, I already sense I have lost quite a bit of the memorty of my first publications and it seems wise to create a living document of this type.
Now, I am not sure exactly if you will find this particularly useful, but I feel (currently starting this as a 3rd year doctoral student), that I don't really know what academic trajectories look like, even when I am surrounded by academics.
In fact, I feel, so far, I have presented myself as being far more knowledgable than I truly am and I think this also can be a good space ot articulate how messy a lot of this work felt in the moment (which I think is a privilege I can only undertake now with a few publications under my belt and the assumption that few people will take a gander at this page at all). Seems like this is pretty much a journal, unsure if it is just for me, or for others, but **shrug**.

As I delve into this, too, I am noticing how much of my early trajectory is based on luck.  Even if I may be deserving, or even if I did indeed work hard or whatever, getting into my doctoral program was a matter of happenstance, getting paired with some high-level mathematical modelers (and the fact that I could convince them I knew enough), getting paired with the right classmates for group projects, getting randomlly asked to join an engineering team... People in positions of power tend to have the power to "make luck happen".  Just wanted to get that down so, if I ever have such a position, that I use that power in a wise way.

These are presented in chronological order for which they were accepted for publication, though not necessarily reflective of the actual publication date: 

#### **Marks, C.**, Zúñiga, M.L., Identifying Key Subpopulations Among HIV+ Latinos Receiving Care in San Diego-Tijuana & Assessing CAM Utilization and ARV Adherence: A Latent Class Analysis. Frontiers in Public Health [DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00179](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2019.00179)

I initially wrote this in the first year of my doctoral program for a multivariate statistics class.  The director of our program, Dr. Zuniga, had been sitting on the data for a while and was kind enough to allow us to use it for the class.  I have a background in computer science and math (not statistics), so this made adopting R fairly straightforward, though I admit my understanding of statistical concepts was rather limited.  I have noticed whenever I have learned something new (usually from making mistakes), it is then really easy to act like you're an expert (even when you just learned that thing like a few days prior).  Anyway, Dr. Zuniga's study focused on Complementary and Alternative Medicine and medication adherence among HIV+ Latinos in the border region.  The general idea was to use a latent class analysis to divide population based on membership in three high-risk HIV groups: people who inject; men who have sex with men; and those who have traded sex.  I believe this was actually the initial idea we landed upon and this analysis made it into the published paper without edit (I will continue to look, but I regret that I am unsure where I saved the R Code...I did the first year of my program using public computers and a chromebook....)  As was noted by another program director, this approach of dividing the population based on membership in these three groups might be seen as arbitrary, for we could have chosen other factors (such as income or nationality) which likely would've bore similar results, but I think the big takeaway I took from this work was that the explanation for your choice in methods are an integral part of the analysis as a whole.  This is social science statistics, there are inherent flaws with every analysis, it's not just our job to run the analysis, but to convince the reader the analysis is meaningful.

#### Baxter, S., **Marks, C.**, Kuo, T., Ohno-Machado, L., Weinreb, R., Machine learning-based predictive modeling of surgical intervention in glaucoma using systemic data from electronic health records. American Journal of Ophtalmology. 2019 In Press [DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2019.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2019.07.005)

In my second year of my PhD program I took a bioinformatics course and was very very very fortunate to be paired up with Dr. Baxter -- I feel it is really important to articulate the role that luck plays in this whole process (regardless of the quality of work or amount of sweat that went into it), because when we go into job interviews and such we aren't exactly supposed to be like "well I got real lucky this one time...".  As a result, I think I can now claim to be a data scientist -- I handled the analytic portion of this paper.  In this paper, the question was, can basic EHR record information (hospital visits, medications, and general vitals) predict glaucoma risk.  We employed three learning models (log regression, random forest, aritifical neural nets) and used a leave-one out cross validation to assess predictive performance.  We initially used a 5-fold cross-validation, but given the small sample size (around 400), the reviewers were like "...do the LOO, bro."  This was also my first forray into major data cleaning and writing replicable code.  It is nice though, because every time I wanna do a cross-validation now I just copy and paste the code and just do a little bit of editing.

#### **Marks C.**, Jahangiri, A.,Machiani, S.G.,Iterative DBSCAN (I-DBSCAN) to Identify Aggressive Driving Behaviors within Unlabeled Real-World Driving Data, Conference Paper, IEEE ITSC 2019, New Zealand 

After my first year in the program, I took a side job (one of many) with the engineering department at SDSU trying to identify aggressive driving from real world driving data -- this has pretty much nothing to do with what I study.  About halfway through, in some ways, I think it became apparent that we needed some tangibles, and so I came up with this algorithm (which one could argue is more of an application of an old algorithm (i mean...that's basically what most science is)).  I dedicated a huge chunk of my time (and emotional energy) on this project, in large part because I  was paid pretty well and because, well, my contributions were frequently validated and I am a human with imposter syndrome just like the next aspiring academic. 

#### **Marks, C.**, Borquez, A., Jain, S., Sun, X., Strathdee, S., Garfein, R., Milloy, M-J, DeBeck, K., Cepeda, J., Werb, D., Martin, N., Opioid agonist treatment scale-up and the initiation of injection drug use: a dynamic modeling analysis. PLOS Medicine. 2019 [DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002973](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002973)   

Early in my program I was paired with Drs Werb and Martin and Dr. Borquez because I "knew math" -- please return to my prior comment about the role that luck plays in all of this.  The general idea was that we wanted to model how scaling up opioid agonist treatment among PWID would impact the number of PWID who initiate.  The first year of this project was a mix of meetings and assignments both to conceptualize what this model might look like, but also for me to prove I could handle the project.  We had a goal of submitting to a special issue of IJDP at the end of the summer 2019, but when we circulated an early draft to co-authors, one co-author said, "well why not submit to PLOS Medicine by early summer" which then began the most hectic 6 month of work I've ever undertaken.  Given the additional statistical rigor of PLOS Med, we turned around a new shiny draft within about 45 days.  Basically two days later I began my two week competency exams and then we got back the feedback indicating acceptance upon several revisions.  While straightforward, we were given two weeks and by the end of these two weeks (including one particularly horrible night where I thought that I had an error in my code that rendered the whole paper broken -- just exhausted paranoia though).  By the end of this I was a puddle of mush.  I wept when we got the official acceptance letter.  As of writing this it is kind of out of site, out of mind.  My advisors told me "PLOS Medicine is a big deal" but, quite honestly, I am a new researcher in the Google Scholar era, I tend to just make sure research is in a real journal, but besides that I give it very little mind.  So I will return back to this if I ever get tangible proof that it is, in fact, "a big deal"

#### Cummins, K., **Marks, C.**, Farewell to Bright-Line: A Guide to Reporting Quantitative Results Without the S-Word. Frontiers in Psychology: Quantitative Psychology and Measurement Special Issue on New Developments in Statistical Methods and Psychometric Tools [DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00815](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00815)

This one felt real good! Kevin, who is also in my program, had talked to me about writing this paper. He's a stats whiz and I really don't have a great stats foundation -- I'm mostly self-taught, relying on my math and computer science education to figure things out (which I would argue helps make me a good applied statistician). This project was very much a labor of love, Kevin had the idea of what he wanted, I helped with putting together the initial drafts. We ended up with a cool paper advocating for using a neoFisherian approach to results evaluation in rejection of Neymar-Pearson appreach (note that this is where my lack of stats training is potentially problematic), but it got bounced without review from several journals before we finally received some harsh, harsh feedback at Frontiers. Essentially, by focusing on underlying theories (Fisher and Neymar-Pearson and neoFisherian) we were obscuring a pretty great (if I do say so) synthesis of how people can write their results without significance testing. We were (or at least I was) pretty dejected by the harsh criticism and felt like it entailed re-writing the paper and life, corona, dissertations, everything felt like a lot. I took a stab at rewriting the draft. We worked through the comments but it was a case of resubmitting a paper and being like "well...here's a new paper". Needless to say, everything worked out. I was shocked and, stuck in quarantine zoomed around my house and did a bunch of fist pumps and dancing and what not. As I have a few papers under my belt now, this moment, when you find out your work is going to be accepted, is one of the few times you get to have just like a victory and let some joy wash over you. While even the peer-review process is subjective, it (along with getting grants accepted or getting a new job) is one of the few concrete things that it seems like can happen in a research career -- so I guess the lesson on this one is just to enjoy it when it happens, because it's unclear if the next one will come in a month, in a year, or ever again.

#### Gicquelais, R., Werb, D., **Marks, C.**, Ziegler, C., Mehta, S., Genberg, B., Schiem, A., A Systematic Review of Prevalence and Correlates of Providing and Receiving Assistance with the Transition to Injecting Drugs. Accepted by Epidemiologic Reviews (9/9/20)

Truly grateful to have been invited onto this paper -- I acted as the second reviewer in what turned into an incredibly rapid systematic review process. We winnowed down several thousand articles and extracted data in a matter of weeks. Fortunately, I had some prior experience acting as a reviewer on a larger systematic review and felt like I could jump straight into this. Rachel did some incredible work -- it felt good to be part of the crew (as opposed to in a more leading effort which seems to be the norm as a PhD student). A project like this needs all the pieces -- of course the first and senior authors play a large role, but it was nice to just be given a (electronic) pile of 2,000 papers and told to just do a job. Feels wild to see the acceptance email in Septemeber of 2020 when we spent sooooo much time in November of 2019 making this review happen. At this stage (entering my 4th (final?) year of my PhD program, I have adjusted to the glacial pace of academic publishing -- doesn't mean I like it tho...

#### **Marks, C.**, Jahangiri, A., Machiani, SG, Identifying and Labeling Potentially Risky Driving: A Multi-Stage Process Using Real World Driving Data. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 2021 In Press

Wow! So, while I was always grateful to have gotten that civil engineering job to help make some money in the middle of my PhD, turns out we were even able to publish a paper! This certainly isn't within my field of expertise from a content standpoint, but generally has been consistent with the machine learning work I have been doing more broadly. In this project, in particular, I had been given a lot of freedom to sort of do as I wished -- this paper, in many ways, arose initially as we needed a tangible to return to the grant provider. So, this paper largely reflected the challenges of working with real-world driving data and the steps needed to "tame it" to make it feasible to work with. All in all, as of writing this, besides prepping the manuscript I haven't really worked on this project or anything similar for a while now -- really grateful to see a lot of hard work result in a paper! I don't think I will be ditching the public health field for engineering tho haha!

#### **Marks, C**, Johnson, D., Carrasco, G., Carrasco-Hernandez, R., Ciccarone, D., Strathdee, S., Smith, D., Borquez, A., Methodological approaches for the prediction of opioid use-related epidemics in the United States: a narrative review and cross-disciplinary call to action. In Press @ Translational Research

Absolutely wild! This is one of two papers (hopefully it will be the next entry in this bib) that I have worked on with Dr. Borquez over the past 18 months (18!) -- it feels like a parallel dissertation almost. This is definitely one of the most expansive and abstract papers I have ever been a part of and it feels really cool to be able to merge together my past training in computer science and my current public health work. The last couple months were crazy with moving to Reno, staying on top of multiple projects, and with working on my actual dissertation. I know that both Annick and I put a ton of hours into this, as this special issue we were invited to was an excellent opportunity to get this paper out there. Up to this point, a majority of my pubs have been to special issues -- seems like it is a good way to fast track publication and/or to find a home for a paper that maybe isn't the most natural academic publication (whatever natural means). As well, it feels like a big jump I have had is in my ability to respond to reviewers effectively -- I feel like this should probably be a bigger part of doctoral training. I have been really fortunate to iterate through the peer=review process a bunch during my training and it is really paying off. I am writing this here as a note for myself to include in the training of future trainees (perhaps, as a more general point, academic publishing and career trajectories often feel really obscure at the outset and making different steps on the journey more transparent along the way i think would be helpful). Anyway!

#### **Marks, C**, Abramovitz, A, Donnelly, CA, Ciccarone, D, Carrasco-Escobar, G, Carrasco-Hernandez, R, Ciccarone, D., Gonzalez-Izquierdo, Martin, NK, Strathdee, SA, Smith, DM, Borquez, A., Identifying Counties at risk of High Overdose Mortality Burden Throughout the Emerging Fentanyl Epidemic in the United States: A Predictive Statistical Modeling Study. In Press @ The Lancet Public Health (4/6/21)

Here is that second paper! Wow! This project...was a roller coaster haha. We must've tried so many different things. In our earlier versions (some conference proceedings) involved some, well, interesting methodological choices. I admit that there were times (probably 6 months prior to initial submission) where I was feeling a bit hopeless on this project or where I felt like we weren't approaching the question in an effective way -- this project really displayed to me the importance of stick-to-it-ness and seeing a project through to the end. I am grateful for Dr Borquez's guidance and drive -- we would not have been able to see this through without. Especially with a paper like this one, perfection is not in the realm of possibility...predictive studies are inherently imperfect. Really trying to internalize the lesson that the quality of research shouldn't be judged against perfection, but simply should be judged for what it is. And somewhere inbetween starting this project (Fall of 2019) and this moment (Spring of 2021) my sort of academic self-identity has shifted. Now, I feel like a person capable of producing high-level, quality research on a consistent basis...and it doesn't hurt that I am surrounded by an absolutely brilliant team of individuals. But, it does feel good to see the version of me on paper start to match up with what I know I am capable of doing and being a part of (i.e. research is not a solo act). I wanted to share this transformation 1) because it feels like an important milestone in how I see myself as a researcher and person and 2) because I feel like this type of transformation is often rendered invisible. Anyway, I am grateful for a little breathing room to finish up my dissertation as well! Hopefully some of that research will be added to this document soon :)

#### **Marks, C**, Bouck, Z, Jain, S, Sun, X, Strathdee, SA, Vickerman, P, DeBeck, K, Milloy, MJ, Hayashi, K, Werb, D, The Impact of Recent Homelessness on the Provision of Injection Drug Use Initiation Assistance Among Persons Who Inject Drugs in Tijuana, Mexico and Vancouver, Canada. Accepted @ Drug Alcohol and Dependence 

This was another paper from Dr. Werb's PRIMER study. Very grateful to have been a given a go at this research topic and to get to learn some new methodological approaches. Also felt like one of the first paper's where it felt like I could really handle all the moving parts -- there was a vision for the paper, we identified the best approach to make that vision happen, we executed it, and voila! Dan's other trainee, Zach, who is a stats whiz, helped with developing an appropriate statistical plan using inverse probability weights -- I am excited to keep getting more of these types of methods under my belt, as I think their application frequently makes far more sense than many of the more "accepted" approaches to statistical model building. Along with several other projects and getting to peer-review, some of my thoughts around appropriate applications of stats are developing. Frequently, in the world of injection drug use, we are working with incredibly small sample sizes with minimal power -- yet, we still see studies using stepwise regressions to develop "final" models which have zero a priori justification. We still see papers then relying on p-values and "significance" to determine the importance of their findings. I guess I am trying to reflect that doing too much in the pursuit of "superficial rigor" often results in manuscripts whose generalizability and conclusions are unclear. Sometimes it is good to just focus on associations, controlling for confounding where and when it is justifiable -- when you don't overstep statisical rigor, even if the study is simple, the results are easier to interpret and are easier to generalize and motivate future work.

#### **Marks, C**, Pearson, JL, Zuniga, ML, Martin, NK, Werb, D, Smith, LR, Articulating The Trauma-Informed Theory of Individual Health Behavior. In Press. 2021. Stress & Health

Wow! Ok...so, this is awesome! I developed this theory to help drive my dissertation, but overall, this feels like the most crucial piece of my dissertation. I will be defending my full dissertation in just over a month, so I can't let myself take a deep breath right now, but this paper really means a lot to me. I get so frustrated hearing health professionals blame people for not being "healthier", I get so frustrated with the inability of our society to actually name systemic harms and try to adjust them, I get so angry that we refuse to meet people where they are and actually trust them and hear them and help them overcome the challenges they are most immediately facing. In this theory, I tried to develop something that could be used to humanize folx -- I have a feeling the average person will find this theory straight-froward or even obvious. Some might wonder why a whole theory was needed, but I hope that for those of you that find it uself, that it may be a tool you can use to move your research forward.
